---
layout: post
---

Notes and highlights from lecture

## Today's Objectives

* Linear systems of equations
* Word problems as linear systems
* Solving linear systems with row reduction

## Reading assignments

* <a target="_parent" href="../../../extras/textbook.pdf">primary text (link)</a>: 9.1-9.2

##  Linear systems of equations

### Basic definition

**Def:** A **linear equation** is an equation of the form

$$a_1x_1 + a_2x_2 + \dots + a_nx_n = b_n$$.

**Examples:**

$$2x + 3y - 4z = 0$$

$$3x_1 + x_2 +7x_4 = 2$$

$$2u - 3v = 4w + 1$$

**Non-examples:**

$$2x^2 + 3y + z = 3$$

$$2xy + x + 4z = 1$$

$$\sin(x) + y = 0$$

**Def:** A **linear system** is a bunch of linear equations grouped together, such as

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
2x + 3y + 4z &=1\\
 x - 2y +  z &=0\\
\end{array}\right.$$

More generally, we can express a linear system of equations as

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
a_{11}x_1 + a_{12}x_2 + \dots + a_{1n}x_n &= b_1\\
a_{21}x_1 + a_{22}x_2 + \dots + a_{2n}x_n &= b_2\\
\dots\\
a_{m1}x_1 + a_{m2}x_2 + \dots + a_{mn}x_n &= b_m\\
\end{array}\right.$$

where the values of the entries $$a_{jk}$$ and $$b_j$$ are known for every $$1\leq j\leq m$$ and $$1\leq k\leq n$$ but the value of $$x_k$$ is unknown.
Each line is a linear equation.  The undetermined values in the equations are called the **variables**.  A **solution** of a linear system consists of specific values of the variables which simultaneously satisfy all of the equations.

### Where do linear systems come from

One problem that we have seen before in this class is to find $$x$$ and $$y$$ with

$$\binom{2}{1}x + \binom{1}{3}y = \binom{4}{7}.$$

Using vector addition and scalar multiplication, we can rewrite this as a linear system

$$\begin{align}
2x + y &=4\\
x + 3y &=7
\end{align}$$

A solution of this linear system is $$x=1$$ and $$y=2$$.

Many examples of linear systems emerge from story problems.

**Ex:** A jar full of spare change contains a mixture of pennies, quarters, and nickels.  There are $$100$$ total coins in the jar and there are twice as many pennies as quarters.  If the total monetary value of the jar is $$8$$ dollars and $$60$$ cents, how many of each kind of coin are in the jar?

We can set this up as a linear system of equations whose variables are the amounts $$p$$, $$n$$, and $$q$$ of pennies, nickels and quarters, respectively.  The corresponding system is

$$\begin{align}
p + n + q &= 100\\
p - 2q&= 0\\
p + 0.05n + 0.25q &= 8.60
\end{align}$$

A solution of this linear system is $$p =60$$, $$q = 30$$, and $$n = 10$$.

### Applications of linear systems
* engineering
* physics
* mathematics
* business
* economics
* nearly everything ...

## Row reduction
Clearly, the ubiquity of linear systems of equations makes it important to understand how to solve such systems.
One method everyone learns starting off is **row reduction**.

### Augmented matrix
To start, for any linear system of equations
$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
a_{11}x_1 + a_{12}x_2 + \dots + a_{1n}x_n &= b_1\\
a_{21}x_1 + a_{22}x_2 + \dots + a_{2n}x_n &= b_2\\
\dots\\
a_{m1}x_1 + a_{m2}x_2 + \dots + a_{mn}x_n &= b_m
\end{array}\right.$$

we associate a **coefficient matrix**

$$A = \left[\begin{array}{cccc}
a_{11} & a_{12} & \dots & a_{1n}\\
a_{21} & a_{22} & \dots & a_{2n}\\
\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\
a_{m1} & a_{m2} & \dots & a_{mn}\\
\end{array}\right]$$

which satisfies the property that

$$A\left[\begin{array}{c}x_1\\ x_2\\ \vdots \\ x_n\end{array}\right] =
\left[\begin{array}{c}
a_{11}x_1 + a_{12}x_2 + \dots + a_{1n}x_n\\
a_{21}x_1 + a_{22}x_2 + \dots + a_{2n}x_n\\
\dots\\
a_{m1}x_1 + a_{m2}x_2 + \dots + a_{mn}x_n
\end{array}\right]
\left[\begin{array}{c}b_1\\ b_2\\ \vdots \\ b_m\end{array}\right]
$$

The associated augmented matrix is 

$$[A|b]  = \left[\begin{array}{cccc|c}
a_{11} & a_{12} & \dots & a_{1n} & b_1\\
a_{21} & a_{22} & \dots & a_{2n} & b_2\\
\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots\\
a_{m1} & a_{m2} & \dots & a_{mn} & b_m
\end{array}\right]$$

A solution of a linear system is then obtained by performing an appropriate sequence of **elementary row operations** to place the augmented matrix in **row reduced echelon form** (RREF).  The solution may then be read off from this form.


## Additional resources



