---
layout: post
---

Notes and highlights from lecture

## Today's Objectives

* Existence of solutions (consistent systems)
* Uniqueness of solutions (free variables)

## Reading assignments

* <a target="_parent" href="../../../extras/textbook.pdf">primary text (link)</a>: Ch. 10

##  Existence of solutions

**Def:** A system of linear equations is **consistent** if it has a solution and **inconsistent** if it has no solutions.

**Example:** The following systems are inconsistent.

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
x &= 1\\
x &= 2\\
\end{array}\right.$$

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
x + 2y &= 0\\
2x + y &= 0\\
x + y  &= 1
\end{array}\right.$$

## Uniqueness of solutions

Solutions are linear systems are not guaranteed to be unique.  However, we either have no solutions, one solution, or *tons* of solutions determined by free variables.

**Definition:**  A variable in a linear system is called a **free variable** if we can choose any value for it that we like and still have a consistent linear system.  Variables that are not free are called **dependent variables**.

**Theorem:** A linear system either has no solutions, one solution, or infinitely many solutions.

In the case of infinitely many solutions, we can naturally view the solutions in two main ways:
* algebraically, in terms of **free variables**
* geometrically, in terms of vector spaces and affine spaces (eg. lines, planes, hyperplanes)

**Example:**
Consider the linear system of equations

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
2x + y  &= 1\\
4x + 2y &= 2\\
\end{array}\right.$$

There are infinitely many solutions of this linear system, described by points $$(x,y)$$ on the line $$y=1-2x$$.

##  Solving linear systems

We can tell whether or not a linear system of equations has, $$0$$, $$1$$, or infinitely many solutions by looking at the the RREF form of the corresponding augmented system.

**Example:**

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
x + y + z  &= 1\\
x +2y + z  &= 3
\end{array}\right.$$

The augmented matrix is

$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc|c}
1 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
1 & 2 & 1 & 3
\end{array}\right]$$

The RREF form of this matrix is

$$\left[\begin{array}{ccc|c}
1 & 0 & 1 &-1\\
0 & 1 & 0 & 2
\end{array}\right]$$

Now any columns to the left of the bar that don't feature a leading one correspond to **free variables**.  In the above, the third column has no leading $$1$$, meaning the third varable $$z$$ is a free variable.
We can write down **all** the solutions by writing down the variables corresponding to columns with leading $1$'s in terms of the free variables.

The system above is

$$\left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
x  + z  &= -1\\
y  &= 2
\end{array}\right.$$

Thus the solutions to this linear system are
$$x = -1-z,\quad y=2.$$



