---
layout: post
---

Notes and highlights from lecture

## Today's Objectives

* Graphs
* Spectral Graph Theory

## Graphs

A graph is a collection of elements, called **vertices**, and a collection of lines connecting pairs of vertices, called **edges**.
In MATLAB a graph can be represented in terms of its **adjacency matrix**, a matrix $$A$$ satisfying

$$A_{jk} = \left\lbrace\begin{array}{cc}
1 & \text{vertices j and k are connected}\\
0 & \text{vertices j and k are not connected}
\end{array}\right.$$

## Important definitions

**Definition:** A graph is called connected if you can travel between any two vertices via a series of edges.

**Definition:** The **degree** of a vertex is the number of edges coming out of the vertex.  A graph is called **regular** if all the vertices have the same degree.

The **degree matrix** $$D$$ is an $$n\times n$$ diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are given by

$$D_{jj} = \text{degree of vertex j},$$

The **graph Laplacian** is the difference of the degree matrix and the adjacency matrix

$$L = D-A.$$

## Spectral graph theory

In mathematics, the term *spectral* refers to eigenvectors and eigenvalues, so spectral graph theory is how we can use the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix or the Laplacian matrix of a graph to study properties of the graph itself.

The most prominant instance of this is the relationship between the eigenvalues of the Laplacian $$L$$ and the connectedness of the graph.

**Theorem:** Let $$G$$ be a graph with Laplacian $$L$$.  Then the following are equivalent.

* (a) The graph $$G$$ is connected
* (b) $$0$$ is a root of the characteristic polynomial $$p(x) = \det(L-xI)$$ of $$L$$ exactly $$1$$ time
* (c) $$0$$ is an eigenvalue of $$L$$ exactly one time
* (d) if $$\vec v$$ satisfies $$L\vec v = \vec 0$$ then all of the entries of $$\vec v$$ are the same.

The fact that we can obtain a global property of the graph $$G$$ (whether it is connected) directly from the eigenvalues is striking!

More generally, the eigenvalues can tell us a lot about the graph, such as how connected it is, what kinds of clusters there are, the behavior of random walks, and more!


